https://swoopnow.com/user-authentication/

User Authentication: Understanding the Basics & Top Tips

    1. What user authentication is?
User authentication is a security process that covers all of the human-to-computer interactions that
require the user to register and log in. Said more simply, authentication asks each user, “who are you?”
and verifies their response.

2. How user authentication works?
In order to gain access, users must prove to the website that they are who they say they are.
The ID and key are enough to confirm the user’s identity, which will allow the system to authorize the user.

It’s important to note that authorization, on the other hand, is what dictates what users are able to see
and do when they log in. While authorization and authentication are often used interchangeably,
the two different terms work together to create a secure login process.

To put it simply, user authentication has three tasks:

Manage the connection between the human (user) and the website’s server (computer).
Verify users’ identities.
Approve (or decline) the authentication so the system can move to authorizing the user.

4. Top user authentication methods
In order for a user to confirm their identity, the individual must provide a piece of information
that only the user and the server knows. This information is called an authentication factor,
and there are three types:

Knowledge factors. Factors the user must know in order to log in are considered a knowledge factor.
This can be anything from a username, password, or pin number. The challenge with these factors is that
they can be weak in terms of security because they can be shared or guessed.
Possession factors. Anything that the user must have in order to log in is known as a possession factor.
One-time password tokens such as a Magic Link™, key fobs, ID cards, and physical tokens are all
considered possession factors.
Inheritance factors. Using a person’s biological characteristics is known as an inheritance factor.
Any biometric authentication process, such as fingerprint scanning and facial recognition, would
fall into this category.

Password-Based User Authentication Methods
Most users are familiar with passwords. In fact, passwords have been the tried-and-true method for user
authentication since the beginning of the internet. You probably have quite a few passwords yourself!

A password-based user authentication process generally looks like this:

When you land on the page, you’ll be asked to enter your username and password.
Your credentials are sent to the website’s server and compared with the information they have on file.
When a match is found, you’ll be able to enter your account.
Passwords are often used to secure personal accounts like social media profiles, online banking and
eCommerce sites, and other online resources. However, passwords are not as secure an option as many users
think they are. And a lot of damage can be done if a hacker is able to gain access to one of these accounts!

Passwordless User Authentication Methods
To put it simply, a passwordless login system is an authentication method that doesn’t require a password.
In the past couple of years, these types of authentication methods have become more popular—and
you’ve probably experienced a few.

There are several different types of passwordless login, but in this article, will cover
two of the most common types:

Biometrics
Fingerprint and iris scanning, facial recognition, and other types of verification through biological
characteristics all fall under the category of biometrics and are considered an “inheritance” authentication factor.

Email Authentication
Email authentication is one of the most universally accessible types of passwordless user authentication,
largely because anyone with an email account can use this method. Thanks to this method, users can create an
account, log in, and access their sensitive data with just a click of a button!

Implement SSO Authentication.
If you’re not familiar with the term SSO, or single sign-on, authentication, it’s a process that lets
you remain logged in to an account even when you move to a different domain or server. This system is ideal
for organizations that have various products and services located on different websites.

Enable a Multi-Factor Authentication Strategy.
A multi-factor authentication strategy is one that verifies users’ identities using multiple
methods of authentication. For example, a user could input their username and password, which then
directs them to a one-time emailed link or security code.